[docs] Add building iOS-like native libraries with NativeAOT (#43397)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/deploying/native-aot/libraries/ios-like-native-libraries-with-nativeaot.md

---
title: Building native libraries for iOS-like platforms
description: How to build and consume native libraries with Native AOT for iOS-like platforms
author: ivanpovazan
ms.author: ivanpovazan
ms.date: 11/11/2024
---

> # Building native libraries for iOS-like platforms

Reviewer: Style rules tell us to avoid -ing words in titles.

    ```

Successful completion of the previous step will produce a pair of files: a shared library `MyNativeAOTLibrary.dylib` and its debug symbols `MyNativeAOTLibrary.dylib.dSYM` which are located at: `MyNativeAOTLibrary/bin/Release/net9.0/<rid>/publish/`

> [!NOTE]
> For creating universal frameworks, it is required to publish the class library for both `Arm64` and `x64` architectures for a given platform.
> This means that step `5.` needs to be repeated twice with different runtime identifiers.
> For example, we would publish the class library with both `maccatalyst-arm64` and `maccatalyst-x64` runtime identifiers as a prerequisite for [Packaging the shared library into a custom MacCatalyst universal framework](#packaging-the-shared-library-into-a-custom-maccatalyst-universal-framework).

## Creating and consuming a custom framework (optional)

Apple imposes a requirement that shared libraries (.dylibs) need to be packaged into frameworks in order to be consumed from applications.

This section describes all required steps to achieve this and a simple scenario of a iOS/MacCatalyst application consuming a shared NativeAOT library/framework.

> [!NOTE]

> > The described steps are just for demonstration purposes. The actual requirements may differ depending on the exact use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The described steps are just for demonstration purposes. The actual requirements might differ depending on the exact use case.
```

> ### Packaging the shared library into custom iOS framework

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Package the shared library into custom iOS framework
```

> 1. Create a framework folder

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a framework folder:
```

    ```bash
    mkdir MyNativeAOTLibrary.framework
    ```

2. Adjust load commands:

    - `LC_RPATH` load command

        ```bash
        install_name_tool -rpath @executable_path @executable_path/Frameworks MyNativeAOTLibrary/bin/Release/net9.0/ios-arm64/publish/MyNativeAOTLibrary.dylib
        ```

    - `LC_ID_DYLIB` load command

        ```bash
        install_name_tool -id @rpath/MyNativeAOTLibrary.framework/MyNativeAOTLibrary MyNativeAOTLibrary/bin/Release/net9.0/ios-arm64/publish/MyNativeAOTLibrary.dylib
        ```

> 3. Manually package the binary into a universal file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Manually package the binary into a universal file:
```

    ```bash
    lipo -create MyNativeAOTLibrary/bin/Release/net9.0/ios-arm64/publish/MyNativeAOTLibrary.dylib -output MyNativeAOTLibrary.framework/MyNativeAOTLibrary
    ```

4. Add a property list file to your framework:

    - Create a `Info.plist` file

    ```bash
    touch MyNativeAOTLibrary.framework/Info.plist
    ```

    - Add the contents from the [appendix](#appendix-infoplist-contents) into the created `Info.plist` file

> After the final step the framework structure should look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the final step, the framework structure should look like this:
```

```
MyNativeAOTLibrary.framework
    |_ MyNativeAOTLibrary
    |_ Info.plist
```

> ### Packaging the shared library into a custom MacCatalyst universal framework

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Package the shared library into a custom MacCatalyst universal framework
```

Universal frameworks require binaries for both `Arm64` and `x64` architecture.

> For this reason, it is required to publish native libraries targeting both RIDs: `maccatalyst-arm64` and `maccatalyst-x64` beforehand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this reason, you must publish native libraries targeting both of the following RIDs beforehand: `maccatalyst-arm64` and `maccatalyst-x64`.
```

> 1. Create a framework folder structure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a framework folder structure:
```

    ```bash
    mkdir -p MyNativeAOTLibrary.framework/Versions/A/Resources
    ln -sfh Versions/Current/MyNativeAOTLibrary MyNativeAOTLibrary.framework/MyNativeAOTLibrary
    ln -sfh Versions/Current/Resources MyNativeAOTLibrary.framework/Resources
    ln -sfh A MyNativeAOTLibrary.framework/Versions/Current
    ```

2. Adjust load commands:

    - `LC_RPATH` load command

        ```bash
        install_name_tool -rpath @executable_path @executable_path/../Frameworks MyNativeAOTLibrary/bin/Release/net9.0/maccatalyst-arm64/publish/MyNativeAOTLibrary.dylib
        install_name_tool -rpath @executable_path @executable_path/../Frameworks MyNativeAOTLibrary/bin/Release/net9.0/maccatalyst-x64/publish/MyNativeAOTLibrary.dylib
        ```

    - `LC_ID_DYLIB` load command

        ```bash
        install_name_tool -id @rpath/MyNativeAOTLibrary.framework/Versions/A/MyNativeAOTLibrary MyNativeAOTLibrary/bin/Release/net9.0/maccatalyst-arm64/publish/MyNativeAOTLibrary.dylib
        install_name_tool -id @rpath/MyNativeAOTLibrary.framework/Versions/A/MyNativeAOTLibrary MyNativeAOTLibrary/bin/Release/net9.0/maccatalyst-x64/publish/MyNativeAOTLibrary.dylib
        ```

> 3. Manually package the binary into a universal file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Manually package the binary into a universal file:
```

    ```bash
    lipo -create MyNativeAOTLibrary/bin/Release/net9.0/maccatalyst-arm64/publish/MyNativeAOTLibrary.dylib MyNativeAOTLibrary/bin/Release/net9.0/maccatalyst-x64/publish/MyNativeAOTLibrary.dylib -output MyNativeAOTLibrary.framework/Versions/A/MyNativeAOTLibrary
    ```

4. Add a property list file to your framework:

    - Create a `Info.plist` file

    ```bash
    touch MyNativeAOTLibrary.framework/Versions/A/Resources/Info.plist
    ```

    - Add the contents from the [appendix](#appendix-infoplist-contents) into the created `Info.plist` file

> After the final step the framework structure should look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the final step, the framework structure should look like this:
```

```
MyNativeAOTLibrary.framework
    |_ MyNativeAOTLibrary -> Versions/Current/MyNativeAOTLibrary
    |_ Resources -> Versions/Current/Resources
    |_ Versions
        |_ A
        |   |_ Resources
        |   |   |_ Info.plist
        |   |_ MyNativeAOTLibrary
        |_ Current -> A
```

> ### Consuming custom frameworks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Consume custom frameworks
```

1. Open `Xcode` (in this example `Xcode 16.0` is used)
2. Create a new `App` project

> 3. Choose the name for your app (e.g., `MyiOSApp`) and choose Objective-C as the source language

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Choose the name for your app (for example, `MyiOSApp`) and choose Objective-C as the source language
```

4. Add a reference to the `MyNativeAOTLibrary` framework

>     - In the `MyiOSApp` targets `General` tab, under `Frameworks, Libraries and Embedded Content` click the `+` sign to add `MyNativeAOTLibrary` as the referenced framework

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - In the `MyiOSApp` targets **General** tab, under **Frameworks, Libraries and Embedded Content**, select **+** to add `MyNativeAOTLibrary` as the referenced framework
```

>     - In the dialog choose: `Add Other` -> `Add Files` and then browse to the location of `MyNativeAOTLibrary.framework` and select it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - In the dialog, choose **Add Other** -> **Add Files** and then browse to the location of `MyNativeAOTLibrary.framework` and select it
```

    - Once selected, set `Embed and Sign` option for `MyNativeAOTLibrary` framework

    ![Drop](./xcode-add-framework-reference.png)

> 5. Add `MyNativeAOTLibrary.framework` location to the list of `Framework Search Paths` in the `Build Settings` tab

Reviewer: ```suggestion

5. Add `MyNativeAOTLibrary.framework` location to the list of **Framework Search Paths** in the **Build Settings** tab
```

    ![Drop](./xcode-add-framework-search-path.png)

> 6. Edit the `main.m` by calling the exposed managed method `aotsample_add` and printing the result

Reviewer: ```suggestion

6. Edit `main.m` by calling the exposed managed method `aotsample_add` and printing the result
```

    ```objc
        extern int aotsample_add(int a, int b);
        int main(int argc, char * argv[]) {
            ...
            NSLog(@"2 + 5 = %d", aotsample_add(2, 5));
            ...

>         }

Reviewer 2: Looks like this is unnecessarily indented.

Author: Thanks, fixed

    ```

7. Select your physical iOS device and build/run the app

> 8. Inspect the logs after the app has successfully launched, the app should print out: `2 + 5 = 7`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. Inspect the logs after the app has successfully launched. The app should print out: `2 + 5 = 7`
```

> [!NOTE]

> > For MacCatalyst, the above-described steps are identical apart from step 7, where the Run Destination needs to be set as: `Mac (Mac Catalyst)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> For MacCatalyst, use the same steps except for step 7, where the Run Destination needs to be set as: `Mac (Mac Catalyst)`.
```

> ## Building static libraries with NativeAOT for iOS-like platforms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Build static libraries with NativeAOT for iOS-like platforms
```

> As described in [building native libraries overview](./index.md#building-native-libraries), it is preferred to build shared libraries, over static ones, due to several limitations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As described in [building native libraries overview](./index.md#building-native-libraries), it's better to build shared libraries over static ones due to several limitations.
```

> However, if desired, building static libraries can be accomplished by following the steps for building a shared one, with an additional property to be included in the project file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, if desired, you can build a static library by following the steps for building a shared one and including an additional property in the project file:
```

```xml
<NativeLib>Static</NativeLib>
```

After the project has been published, the static library `MyNativeAOTLibrary.a` can be found at: `MyNativeAOTLibrary/bin/Release/net9.0/<rid>/publish`.

> Consuming the static library and configuring the consumer project are not covered in this document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This article doesn't cover how to consume the static library and configure the consumer project.
```

---
title: Building native libraries for iOS-like platforms
description: How to build and consume native libraries with Native AOT for iOS-like platforms
author: ivanpovazan
ms.author: ivanpovazan
ms.date: 11/11/2024
---

# Building native libraries for iOS-like platforms

Starting from .NET 9, Native AOT officially supports publishing .NET class libraries for iOS-like platforms.

> This enables users to create self-contained native libraries that can be consumed from iOS, Mac Catalyst and tvOS applications.

Reviewer 3: I assume that Objective-C interop is not available for native libraries built this way. Is that correct? Should we mention it here?

Author: Thank you, fixed.

---
title: Building native libraries for iOS-like platforms
description: How to build and consume native libraries with Native AOT for iOS-like platforms
author: ivanpovazan
ms.author: ivanpovazan
ms.date: 11/11/2024
---

# Building native libraries for iOS-like platforms

> Starting from .NET 9, Native AOT officially supports publishing .NET class libraries that don't depend on iOS workloads for iOS-like platforms.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Starting from .NET 9, Native AOT supports publishing .NET class libraries that don't depend on iOS workloads for iOS-like platforms.
```

        {
            return a + b;
        }
    }
    ```

### Building iOS shared libraries

This section covers building shared libraries for iOS physical devices (RID: `ios-arm64`).
Targeting iOS simulators (RIDs: `iossimulator-arm64`, `iossimulator-x64`) is almost identical and is not covered in this guide.

1. Publish the class library and target desired iOS platform

    ```bash
    dotnet publish -r ios-arm64 MyNativeAOTLibrary/MyNativeAOTLibrary.csproj
    ```

2. Shared library `MyNativeAOTLibrary.dylib` and debug symbols `MyNativeAOTLibrary.dylib.dSYM` will be located at: `MyNativeAOTLibrary/bin/Release/net9.0/ios-arm64/publish/`

### Building MacCatalyst shared libraries

This section covers building shared libraries for MacCatalyst (RIDs: `maccatalyst-arm64`, `maccatalyst-x64`).

1. Publish the class library and target MacCatalyst for `Arm64` architecture

    ```bash
    dotnet publish -r maccatalyst-arm64 MyNativeAOTLibrary/MyNativeAOTLibrary.csproj
    ```

2. (and/or) Publish the class library and target MacCatalyst for `x64` architecture

    ```bash
    dotnet publish -r maccatalyst-x64 MyNativeAOTLibrary/MyNativeAOTLibrary.csproj
    ```

> 3. Previous steps will produce two pairs of files: a shared library `MyNativeAOTLibrary.dylib` and its debug symbols `MyNativeAOTLibrary.dylib.dSYM` for each of the two architectures, which will be located in their respective publish folders: `MyNativeAOTLibrary/bin/Release/net9.0/<rid>/publish/`

Author: Thanks. I simplified the instructions.

# Building native libraries for iOS-like platforms

> Starting from .NET 9, Native AOT officially supports publishing .NET class libraries that don't depend on iOS workloads for iOS-like platforms.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Starting from .NET 9, Native AOT supports publishing .NET class libraries that don't depend on .NET MAUI SDK.
```
We have separate workloads for Maui iOS and Maui Mac Catalyst. Should we just say .NET MAUI SDK?

Also, it is redundant to say "officially supported" in the official docs. When we say "supported" in the official docs, it implies official support.
